... you're an army.
All right. Well, welcome. Um, we've got you here for, um,
half an hour. We've got, I think we, we've got a minute bonus because we're early.
(laughs)
Um, so we've got you here for half an hour, so, um, the usual process will, um...
You know, if you want to save about three or four minutes to start off with, and
then we'll go straight to questions. I don't know if you...
How do you want to handle it between the two of you in terms of-
Well, we've got delegations, so anything-
Yeah.
Would you-
... delegation, anything like that.
Do you both want to do some intros in your own areas and then-
Uh, we- we don't have a lot to say. I mean-
Okay.
Um-
Right. Okay, anyway, in your heads.
Well, uh, just, just a couple of things that I think would be worth
maybe thinking about. Um, one is, uh,
transition to road user charges, electronic road user charges,
um, which is a, a, a really important structural
change for the revenue system that runs the transport system
obviously. Um, the simple reality is we
have, uh, declining revenue over
time because of the rise of hybrids and EVs, um,
and fuel efficiency, which is a good, which is a good thing, um,
but we've got to make sure that, uh, the revenue...
we get the revenue to run the, run the roads and the transport system.
And so, the electronic road user charges is, is a really
important, um, step towards revenue
sustainability, uh, but also recognizing the fact that the RUC
system, you know, needs to enter the modern world as well.
I mean, it's pretty ridiculous you still need to go out and
buy your $1000 license or your 1000 kilometer license.
It gets sent in the mail and you've got to put it on the front s- stick, you know,
in the front, front of your dashboard and all the rest of it.
So, we're trying to bring... I mean, the RUC system itself is actually
world-leading in comparison to a lot of other countries where we're far
in advance of other places, but we've got to bring it into the modern world.
The other point I'd stress is that we're not, we're not rushing this.
Um, there's, there's quite a bit of work to do.
Um, uh, and, you know, we'll be ma- we'll be making decisions,
um, in d- in due course. Um, and successive governments will have to do that as
well. And so, we're quite keen to do this in a quite constructive and
sensible way. Um,
and yeah, so I, you know, I encourage the committee to have a, have a think about
that, um, in the future. But, um, there's a lot of other things.
I could talk for half an hour, but obviously it's better if you have questions, so
happy to, happy to go straight in.
Yeah. I just think you'd, you'd like to say as well?
Yeah. It's the only thing I would add is that, um, in the aviation space is a real
focus on regional connectivity and the work that, um, ministry is doing in that
space, along with, uh, airlines, airports and civil
aviation. Uh, rules reform, certification
processes, the Cross-Industry Aviation Action Plan and we
acknowledge the previous government for the Interim Aviation Council bringing
together industry and government for the first time.
And then in the maritime space, significant investment in and around Chatham
Islands shipping, vessel, uh, and coastal shipping services as well.
So our focus really is on the connectivity, logistics and infrastructure.
(coughs)
Wow.
Making sure our rules are fit for purpose and, um, the committee would have
seen some rules announced last week around advanced aviation and just
being an enabler in that space as well. That's really it.
Cool. Okay. We'll go straight to questions.
I'm gonna take, uh, Tangi and then-
Oh,
Yeah. Thanks, mate. (clears throat) Thank you.
And if nobody else goes, I'll go next.
Um-
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, thank you, ministers.
Um, I wanted to ask questions about RONS.
Um, I think Minister, you, you have now publicly acknowledged that the figure
associated with delivering the RONS at this stage will
be around $56 billion, which is quite a significant
increase on what had previously been signaled when, uh,
when you were identifying this. And I note that you said that there are hard
choices lie ahead because of the, the challenges.
In terms of actually, um, transitioning that project
to, um, delivering, I think the amount that's been set
aside is about $1.2 billion, which is
basically around 2% of that, that total.
So h- how, how can this credibly still
be, uh, delivered as a suite, uh,
of, of a package, uh, given the real funding
constraints that you yourself now identify?
Yeah, I think that's a good question.
Um,
the, the roads of national significance and indeed, um, I tend to
talk about major transport projects in the round because it's not just about
the roads. Um, we've got significant, uh, demand
for important projects like the North Western Busway in Auckland, for example,
which is a very important project.
Obviously public transport in Auckland, Wellington and Christchurch and other
places as well. Um, so you're right that there's
a, there's a, uh, that they're expensive.
Um, and what I was trying to lay out in that speech that I think you're
referencing, uh, a couple of weeks ago is that,
um, there, there are real challenges around that.
Um, what, what I hear from the industry, uh, and, and, and
also New Zealanders is they want a credible pipeline of
delivery in the long term. So I'm just...
You know, I was just stating the obvious in a way a couple of weeks ago, which is
that
we're not gonna build everything straight away and, um,
not everything can happen all at the same time.
So the idea you'd go out and have six major roads in construction, you just
literally could not do that from a market capacity point of view.
And if you did do it, it would push up construction cost inflation to stratospheric
levels, so you, you actually don't want to do that.
What you want is a, is a credible, long term, sustainable
pipeline that people can see ahead of them.
Um, and so we're doing some work on that at the moment.
Um, we're not, we're not there yet, but that's a, that's a 2026
type thing. And, and related to that, um,
again just trying to make the point to people so everyone's aware of it, that there
are quite difficult choices around that.
Ultimately, roads ha- roads and public transport projects have to be
paid for. Now, fuel tax, um, is going up in
2027 and 2028, um, but-... but it has been
held flat for quite a long time, um, and, you
know, there's a... Fuel tax will have to go up, but there's also a limit,
economically and politically, as I think you would acknowledge, to how much fuel
tax can go up. Um,
tolls are a useful revenue source, um, crown capital contributions into
the National Land Transport Fund, which successive governments have been making,
uh, for- for some time now. Um, that- that capital is
contestable with roads and- w- with our hospitals and schools and
defense. Committee will be aware of significant, um, uplift in
defense capital. Uh, so all of that- all of that competes.
And the roa- the- the transport system, which is meant to be self-funding
through- through RUC and fuel tax, has not been for- for a long
time, um, and so I'm- I'm just ma- I'm just trying to s- speak the
blunt reality, um, and, um, you know, it's good that you noticed
(laughs) .
I do as well. That's- that's accepted.
Um, in terms of that reference to, you know, work being done at the
moment but not available yet. So, I infer from that that there is a
reprioritization process that you're looking at in terms of the
suite of RONS and which ones might be able to be delivered
at what point of time. Is that what you're referencing there?
Y- y- more sequencing.
So we're committed to the- the- to the 17 RONS that are in the GPS, the- the
Government Policy Statement. You know, those are- those are government priorities
as- as they're reflected in the GPS, but they're at different stages, right?
So, just take two obvious examples, um,
and- and don't- and don't infer anything from this, um, in terms of the
prioritization, but- but it just illustrates the point.
Cambridge to Piary, which is the extension of the Waikato Expressway, you know,
that just got consent through- through the previous government's fast track, uh,
process, um, so 20- 20- 24 kilometers? Is that right?
21?
Roughly.
20... Yeah, ro- yeah, let's say 20, offline extension of
the Waikato Expressway. Um, that- that's got consents.
That's been- look, that's been planned for years, you know?
There's been various different commitments made around that.
That is- that is quite close to- well, close-ish to
construction. Uh, the North West Alternative State Highway in
North West Auckland, you know, that- that's frankly just like a line on a
map. That- that is- that is like years away from construction.
So, that- the kind of my point is that- that they are actually at different
stages anyway, um, so some are closer to-
construction, s- some are- are much further down- down the
line and that- and that's why that 1.2 billion that you referenced, which sounds
like a big number but actually when you- when you add it all up around the
different projects, you know, it all- it all sort of evens out.
That is- that is to get projects further up the kind of food chain, so to speak,
towards construction- construction readiness.
So it's about, you know, designations and land acquisition and consenting
and route protection and doing the designs.
I mean, all of that stuff takes time and- and costs money,
and, um, you know, it's not quite as simple as maybe some members of the public
think. It's like, "Oh yeah, we're gonna build a road here, just turn up and build
it." Like it's- it's much more complicated than that, as I think the committee will
appreciate. So, so that's- that's- that's- that 1.2 billion is
going towards creating that credible pipeline.
And in terms of to your question about prioritization, it's not so much about
reprioritization. I would classify it as, um, trying to get the
right sequence, um, and- and the right time
frames.
Just one-
One more, yep, and
then over to you again. ... further brief sub. Given that your government has, uh,
sort of presided over cuts in the areas of road safety, public
transport and the like-
I just got to go to here.
... what guarantee is there that as these projects move
forward, not prioritization but sequencing, that
communities will not face even deeper cuts as a result to find the revenue to-
No, no.
... to- to sort out?
I don't know what you mean by- I don't know what you mean by cuts to road safety
and public transport. There's more money for both in this NLTP
period. In fact, we've made quite a significant investment in Road Police and road
safety, for example. So, what's that a reference to?
Well- well, in terms of road safety, the focus on road safety is not a
priority and likewise, if you, you know, talk to any council around the
country, they'll talk to you about the need that they actually have to do much of
the heavy lifting now in terms of farebox recovery to- to initiate
an increase in revenue.
It is- it is-
So you having said- Just let me finish.
Sorry.
So having said that, what guarantees can you provide to
communities to ensure that there are no further deeper cuts as a result of
needing to find the revenue to-
Yeah.
Well, we- we can disagree. I mean, I reject your characterization of cuts, we- but
we can agree to disagree on that. Um, we- we have asked, um, p- public
transport authorities to lift, um, their private share, um,
or- or to lift their private share, um, and that- and that's because,
uh, there's been a quite steep decline in- in the amount of
private share that people contribute towards public transport,
um, o- over time. It sort of started- actually started a little bit
pre-COVID, but it sort of accelerated during COVID.
Um, and so we're trying to get- trying to get that share back to what it was
pre kind of 2019. Um, w- we haven't actually set that target
to... L- like, the- the numbers actually won't even get back to pre-2019 levels.
We've just- we've just asked for a bit more.
But- but also NZTA is taking a flexible approach with- with public transport
authorities, um, around that. Um, so
I- I reject- I reject your characterization, um, but you're right.
The- the roads and- and major transport
projects, they kind of have... I mean, there's a baseline level of things
you have to do right in the system, um, with transport system
funding from... And maintenance is obviously critical and I think you probably had
InfraCom in already and they'll have told you that, you know, as a country, we've
been far too focused on new stuff at the expense of looking after what we've
already got. That's important. And there's big investment in this, um,
GPS period, uh, into road maintenance and,
significant uplift there which is really important.
It's making a difference around the country.
So you got your baseline level stuff, and I would classify public transport as part
of that, and, um, road safety, uh, all the different things that are in the
activity classes, and then you got your stuff on top of that, which is your new-
your new spend. And, you know, we'll have a Government Policy Statement in
2027,
uh, as the next kind of-... you know, it's the next window to, to look at that
stuff. And, um, you know, as I say, there, there are some quite tough choices
because, um, every, you know... And council's a part of this
too. Everyone wants something, and you gotta work out where the money
goes. (laughs)
Um, the colleagues, um, rather than take subs on these, 'cause we've only got 20
more minutes, um, what I'm gonna do is just, so put your subs into your main bits.
If we can get round, 'cause everybody wants to have a say at some point, so we'll
go do that, and if, uh, we got some time for some subs on the end of that, we'll do
that. So Julianne, now I'm gonna come over here to-
Could the minister-
...
Can I just ask, mister, through the chair-
Oh,
yeah. ... if the minister could be a little more succinct in his answers, we could ask
more questions?
Well-
Um, if- that'd be awesome.
We, we, we will try. You're getting very full some answers, but- (laughs)
Yeah.
We'll try and-
Trying to-
... trying to keep it all tight.
Mine... Happily, mine are very much in the same area.
I'm a helpful man, Julianne. I'm just trying to assist you-
Okay, come on.
... on your journey.
Let's go.
Um, uh, my area of questions was related to Tangi,
so, um, I wanted to know will... How important
is, uh, benefit-cost analysis in
determining the prioritization of the RONZ?
Uh, it's-
And the sequencing.
It's important, but it's, um, it's, it's not the determinative
factor.
Um, why not?
Well, because, uh, you, you, we're, we're trying to take a range of
things into account in terms of the sequencing.
Um, so if you did a, if you did a strict, uh, if you did it strictly on BCR,
right, leaving aside the, the merits or otherwise of, of benefit-costs,
which, you know, has its own issues.
If you did it strictly on BCR, you might end up with quite a skewed, um,
sequence. Um-
Right. But if something is low benefits
relative to cost, is it likely
to come early on in the program of RONZ?
I suppose what I would say to you is we are taking account of a range of things,
benefit-cost is part of it. Um, regional spread, because you
don't... Like, you, you don't wanna end up in the situation where, you know, and
I'm not saying this would happen be- on a strict BCR basis, but y- if you just...
All your projects were in Auckland, for example, that would not be, um,
economically sustainable for Auckland, but also frankly wouldn't be politically
sustainable for everybody. Um, and,
uh, um,
i- i- it also, uh, y- we're taking account of
m- readiness for market and construction readiness as well, because, you know,
again, if you talk to the sector, they'll say to you, "We've gotta stop the
boom-bust, up-down, yo-yo effect." And so what we're trying to do
is, and this is why it's complicated, is, is get a
credible 10 to 20-year sequence of major
projects around the country, um, that is, that
is deliverable, um, has a regional spread, so
that, so that there's a good spread around the country and you're not focused or
concentrated on one area, um, and that are good value-for-money projects.
And, you know, there are clearly, there's, like, clearly tensions between all those
things, which is why it's complicated, which is why we haven't done it yet.
(laughs)
Should, um-
(clears throat)
... congestion pricing or changes to pricing, like tolling, be
taken into account early on in determining the
pr- like, projects that might happen?
Yeah. We're doing, we're doing some thinking about that.
The, the challenge, of course, is that we don't have any congestion pricing schemes
established yet, and obviously we've just passed the legislation and thank you to,
to your committee for all your work on that.
Uh, but a- and Auckland's working away with officials now on, on getting,
getting, um-
... some stuff, some stuff ready for 2026, 2027.
But that's a, that's a bit down the line.
Um, so we're do- just doing some thinking about how we might integrate, uh, that
policy, which I think everyone kind of supports broadly into, into that
work.
But it, it has previously been taken into account in modeling
demand, benefits, costs of projects prior, so could it-
Yeah, it could be-
There's nothing stopping it from being
No, no. And this is why we're doing some thinking about it.
Yeah.
It, it can be, it can be looked at, but, but also I don't wanna get ahead
of where Auckland or, or maybe Wellington gets to.
This is one more.
You know what I
Yeah. Um, the changes to the discount rate and evaluation
period have, uh, substantial impacts on the
overall benefits and costs of, um, the
RONZ. So you've extended the evaluation period to 60
years, and the discount rate's been lowered to 2% or even
1.5 far out in the future. The Ministry of Transport came in
and briefed us on their long-term insights briefing and said it was extremely
difficult and basically impossible to model, um,
travel demand 60 years in the future and even 30 years in the future.
They said it was difficult. Actually, my main question is- (laughs)
I mean, you're right. I didn't do the VCR thing, by the way.
Is, is the-
Treasury did that.
Yeah, sure. Well, is, is NZTA... I mean, is the intention for Ministry
of Transport, NZTA and local authorities to now use the same lower
discount rate and longer evaluation period across all projects?
That is a good question. I don't know.
I mean, I, I'm not responsible for the discount rate thing. Treasury did that.
Um, Ruth, do you or Brett, do you... What...
Do you know what the rule, what the rule is there?
We can come back this afternoon and get
Can we put that on notice and come back?
Okay. Do, do-
I actually don't know what the answer to that is. It's a good question.
Okay.
Um, I mean, you're right about the 50 and 60 year thing.
I mean, like, you know, the... I mean, who knows what world we'll be like in
2075? I mean, flying cars, flying planes, so.
(laughs)
Everybody wouldn't be building roads till it's ...
I mean-
(laughs)
Lots of airports.
Well, yeah. (laughs)
(laughs)
So.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Minister, just interested in exploring a little bit more
about the opportunities that, uh, that the RONZ project
offers-
Mm-hmm.
Uh, or the program. I mean, you've been very forthright in
explaining, uh, the cost issues, the timing
issues, um, the capacity that's gonna constrain
New Zealand's ability to deliver those projects.
But I'm interested in whether, uh, w- whether, uh,
you've considered the RONZ specification,
the four-laning-
Yep. ... grade-separated interchanges, very wide lanes-
Yep.
... uh, is actually necessary to deliver-
Yeah.
... the benefits?
Because when I look at Australia, even on the ends-
S- Simon, we'll keep the, keep the questions tight, please.
Yeah, yeah. Well, M- Mr. Chair, I'd just like to explain the context.
Uh, I th- I think Simon's
In Australia, they have, um, they're quite open to 80 to
110 is the range.
Yeah.
Some wi- some two-lane, some three-lane-
Yeah. ... some four-lane.
Is that something you've considered?
Y- yes, it is. And, uh, th- to be honest, we've actually moved away from the kind
of 100 to 110 four-lane, you know, gold-plated expressways
already. So, um-Just take a local example that I happen to
know a little bit about, um, Petone to Granada for example, where you down to 60 to
80 there?
60 now-
S- it's 60 to 80, and there's two... is it four lanes or two?
No, it's four lanes but it's
60 to 80. Four lanes but it's two... but it's 60 to 80, so it's... that...
so that means the gradient is lower, right?
So it's significantly cheaper, cuz yeah.
So, um... and there's a... and actually if you read all the investment cases
that... I mean, you could go through this with NZTA if you want later, but there's
a range of different things. So kind of have done that. One of, one of my...
I'll just be honest with you, one of my frustrations in this is that, uh,
it, it's just the high costs and, um,
I have s- made it really clear to the Transport Agency,
um, that I want value for money in terms of
delivery and, um,
we d- we do not... we do not need to gold plate things.
Um, we actually just need functional value-for-money
roads, um, and where there's the ability to strip cost out, we
should do that. Um, speed is part of that, but,
um, there's, there's a ra- there... like, there's a range of different things.
I mean, to be honest, the RMA reforms that, um, you know, I know you know a little
bit about, Mr. Cork, uh, that will make a difference.
Like some of the consent conditions that get attached to roading
projects drive significant cost, um, that
just flows through to someone paying. Uh, and so that... the...
all of these things make a difference, but, uh, to be honest, it's an enduring
frustration for me, um, and we are not there yet and I am open to
all sensible ideas as to how to strip cost out.
Um, I know the committee's done a little bit of work on this in the last few years
already, um, and so we, we welcome your, your feedback
on that.
Thank you.
Oh, my question is to the Associate Minister of Transport.
Go
back.
Oh, very good.
And he will shut up.
So we know that people are very frustrated at flight being canceled all the
time. What, what have you done to address these issues?
That's a good question. Um, yeah, people are frustrated and especially those in the
regions. So, earlier this year, we announced, um, some
funding from the Regional Infrastructure Fund for regional air connectivity,
so that's to enable, uh, regional airlines to invest in their own
infrastructure, um, debt recovery, leasing arrangements to
provide some securities for some of those regional routes.
Um, we've, we've invested in inter-lining arrangements, the technology to
support those, and the first one of those launched between, um, Air
Chathams and Air New Zealand in Whakatāne earlier this year and is actually d- due
to go online probably this week, this month.
And there's a, there's an ability to expand that, so then you, um, as a regional
customer, you're buying one ticket to get from Whakatāne to Auckland to Wellington
to Timaru say, rather than having to go through two or three airlines.
So those are probably a couple of initial steps and then there's broader Aviation
Action Plan which looks at the industry, um, and the sector as a whole
and it's looking at things like T- Minister Bishop's other portfolio around
infrastructure. What are the long-term through-the-year infrastructure needs for
airports and what does, um, aviation and air connectivity look like
across the country?
Have you looked into the workforce issues?
Yeah, so workforce is another one.
We have a shortage of pilots and engineers and also, um,
it can be a challenge to find space for our air traffic controllers in the
system. Uh, again, the Aviation Action Plan puts a lot of focus on workforce
development and, um, there is a report due back from Ringa Hora,
uh, towards the end of the year about how we could possibly amend the pilot
qualification system to speed up the training but also what can we do
to, um, make more hours available to pilots because one of the, one of the barriers
to becoming a commercial pilot is that you can get your ticket and you do your 200
hours but then to be able to fly, you actually need five to six hundred hours and
where do you get those hours in New Zealand?
Um, a lot of people will choose to do that, um, uh, in their private time
while they're working outside the sector and others may be forced to go overseas to
get those hours. So we're looking at those kind of issues as well.
Sure. Thank you. Tracey.
Mm-hmm.
Also on the, uh, area of skilled New Zealand, skilled New Zealand,
um, workers. Um, Minister wholesome is seeking to replace the New
Zealand-flagged, um, MV Buffalo with cheaper
foreign-flagged vessel which, as you'll be aware, puts 32, um, skilled
Kiwi seaf- seafarers out of work just after Christmas, three days after
Christmas. Um, we would contend that approving this undermines our maritime
law, um, eh, coastal shipping capabilities and actually quite
frankly the government's own, um, promise to put New Zealand workers
first. Uh, it's a bit of a test therefore of, uh, whether Kiwi jobs
are more than just a slogan. Have you... where are you up to in that process?
Have you... um, has the exemption application been
approved?
No, the application hasn't. The decision on the application hasn't been made yet.
Um, it's still currently being considered, um, can't say too
much more on that 'cause it is under consideration but I'm expecting a
decision to be made in the next, um, next week or so.
And are those things that you're taking...
those, those issues that I've prefaced, are those all issues that you're
very aware of and, um, taking into account in terms of making
that?
Y- yes, that would be a fair summary.
We've got to make the decision in line with what the statute requires us in the,
the relevant considerations. Um, but those are certainly
factors that I'm aware of both as Minister but also, um, you know, my role as a
local member of Parliament. We're all...
those of us who have votes are all, um, very much, uh, enthusiastic
about our seafaring industry being very, very strong so it's something we support.
Thank you. Dan.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Uh, Minister, in the, um, in your annual
report for 2024/2025 after priority
one which is about economic growth and productivity is improving road
safety-
Yes.
I'm just, uh, curious on whether, um,
both priorities can go hand-in-hand in your view and if so, what
has your ministry done in the last year to improve road safety
and what are the results? Um...
Yeah, I mean, obviously, um, I mean, I think they can go hand-in-hand
obviously. We want a, um, a growth enhancing
transport system but we also want it to be safe.
That's, that's, uh, obviously important.
Um, so w- we're making good progress.
I mean obviously, uh, probably the biggest thing is, is
the...... Parliament's third attempt to roll out a,
um, roadside drug, (laughs) um, oral fluid drug testing
regime. Um, so we've now approved the devices and, um,
we're doing a launch on the 15th of December, which is not
far away actually, now I think about it. Uh, so that's— that's good progress.
I'm— I'm cautiously optimistic about it.
Um,
uh,
the police have significantly lifted their breath
testing numbers, uh, with the caveat obviously
around the, um, uh, the news
that I think everyone's aware of around, um, some of the
discrepancies, um, which is of concern to me
obviously, and there's a process underway around that.
Um, but notwithstanding, uh, that discrepancy there has been
a- an uplift and certainly anecdotally I get- I get quite a bit of feedback from
people that they're noticing more breath testing, um, happening, which-
which is in and of itself is quite an important thing because,
you know, people- people think that they might get, um,
breath tested on the way home, they- they think again about that extra drink or
stuff, so that- that does make a difference.
Um,
so we're making good progress, we're not there yet, um, the road toll- road toll is
too high, I want to see it come down obviously.
Mm-hmm.
Um, yeah.
Good. Thank you. Julianne.
Um, just coming back to the roads of national significance, and you
mentioned the trade-offs with other parts of, um, the
Crown's investment in hospitals or other types of
infrastructure. Um, the Infrastructure Commission said
earlier this week to us at this committee that they had-
that they had not received, uh, the roads of national significance
projects, um, as part of the IPP assessment, which
is of course a-
a, um, a really excellent, um, system that your- your
government and you have initiated to identify project readiness
and- and improve investment. Given the, like, large amount
of likely Crown money that's going to be going
into some of these-
Mm-hmm.
... will- can we expect them to be subject to the same process other infrastructure
projects are?
Uh, po- possibly. Um, ca- a couple of things I'd say is, one is the
IPP program is- is in its- in its infancy, so we've
just had the release of the Round Two, uh, results and it's- it's
currently a voluntary program and that's- that's partly deliberate because we want
to, you know, get some runs on the board and see how it goes, and feedback is
it's- is it's pretty good. It's not so much about project readiness, in fact
it's almost the opposite, it's more about, um,
you know, well I mean stage one, the- the first gateway is, is there a problem?
You know? And- and actually in and of itself that's- that's quite a useful kind
Mm-hmm.
... thought process to make people go through, like, is there a problem here?
Is the- is the solution you've come up with actually a good one?
And then is it deliverable? So, and- and nothing's got actually stage three
approval yet, in fact most- most people apply at stage two through the
IPP because they think they've got this great idea and actually they've been told,
"Well, we're not sure about that as the solution, but
you've identified a problem, so go back and do some extra work
on..." You know, and- and that
analytical rigor is- is good, is a good thing.
So, but it's in its infancy, we're- it's not even a year old.
And NZTA of course has its, which you can go through with them, you know, they've
got their own... I mean it's a Crown agency isn't it, they've got their own
approval processes around, um, uh, delivery
and readiness and value for money and- and all that stuff.
So, um, they're kind of separate processes and, uh,
in time we may- we may get to a position where- where- where there's- there's some
involvement there. Um, but you know, not every Crown agency is going through the
IPP process at the moment, it's a voluntary thing, Defense has put some stuff
in from memory, um, but Education hasn't, um, Health
hasn't. There might be, there might be a couple of Health ones, but yeah.
Yeah. Okay, one more from Julianne, then Tangi.
Um, uh, given that the two most
expensive, um, roads are in urban areas,
East-West Link and, uh, the Wellington projects, which are extremely
high cost per kilometer-
Nor- I think Northland's more expensive but yeah.
Uh, no, per kilometer.
Oh, per kilometer.
Per kilometer they're vastly more expensive.
Yeah, yeah, well
it's expensive to build in urban areas, yep. Yeah, and given that, um, there is the potential and the Infrastructure Commission
has, um, suggested congestion pricing and pricing in urban
areas might be a better solution, um, uh, you
know, is that going to be something that they, that the government considers?
'Cause I guess what you've just said about problem definition-
Yeah.
... that can't really be applied to the RONs because they've just been listed as a
list of projects in the GPS, uh, and so there isn't that-
Yeah.
... problem definition and openness to-
Yeah, but you- you'll notice that- that both the, um, both State Highway 1
improvements and the East-West Link, both of which have long histories that you're
all very familiar with, they're both different projects to what they were in the
past. The East-West Link's been completely redone.
Mm-hmm.
Um, so, you know, is- is there a problem in that part of Auckland?
Yes, there is. It's extremely congested, it's a major logistics
and freight hub, it's a massive hub of economic growth, and it is
constrained because of the, um, configuration of the state highway system, so
something has to be done in that part of Auckland, um...
But would- would congestion pricing-
I mean maybe that's more Make it a priority
yeah. Well- well- well po- possibly, and I- I'll just repeat what I said before, which is
that we are thinking about, we're thinking about that,
um, in the- in a- in a way that I think you would- you would appreciate.
Tangi?
Thank you. Just a short question, uh, around affordability but also
transparency with the RONS.
Yeah.
Sometimes, uh, Waka Kotahi are- are actually very good at putting stuff on the- the
website in terms of individual projects, that doesn't necessarily seem to be the
case for each of the RONS in terms of the level of detail.
I appreciate that you're going through a- a, uh, not a
privatization process but a scheduling sort of process.
Is it your expectation that the agency would provide as
much detail around changes to those aspects as
these- these RONS are progressed?
Y- yeah, and I think, I think it... All the stuff's online now, right?
We've done summaries and we plan to res- release the full, best capacity at
the time of-
I think some of them are online already.
Uh, some of them are already online.
Some of them are already online.
But do
you think- Yeah, I mean-
Well-
The short answer is yes. I, I'd be ni... There's nothing to hide here.
Like, they should just-
Well-
... be online.
Just following up on that. Th- there is a slight issue because, and this is what
happened with the tolling situation last year, where there was a consultation
process out and then some information, albeit redacted, appears halfway
through a consultation process.
Okay.
So, you know, I- is, is the government committed to making sure
that when you open these processes, all the information is available so that people
can have an informed sense of participating in the process?
Oh, I wasn't in the minister when that particular example was being referred to, so
I don't... I can't comment on that. But, but the short answer is yes.
I mean, you know, NZTA is a massive organization.
They have, um, thousands of employees and regional offices, spend quite a lot of
time actually engaging with local communities around
projects. Obviously, some, sometimes that will be better than,
than other times. Um, no one's perfect, but, uh, I think they
do a pretty good job of engagement, engaging,
um, at a regional level with councils and, and stakeholders.
I hate that, I hate that word-
Uh, all, all good, Minister.
... but, but you know what I mean.
We've got the commitment.
Perfect, perfect, yep.
Yeah. The short, short answer is yes.
If you can indulge me, I'll ask one question for you as well-
Yes, please, Mr. Chair.
... which is, which is just in terms of what we heard yesterday, particularly, uh,
around the designation process. Um, and I know you're also minister in the, the
RMA side of things, and that is the length of time it takes to put land together
to do a major proj... This, in this instance it was KiwiRail, but the same will be
true sometimes for NZTA, seeing a nod at the back there.
The ability for, uh, agencies who want to do a project or
provide for project at some stage in the future, and you said obviously there's a
pipeline-
Yeah.
... to be able to do that and not sort of get the pressure of going, "Hey, we can't
sustain that designation for a long bit of time."
Yeah, so you'll wait... I mean, this is a bit different, different hat now, but,
um, with this and... There's some changes we've already made to that through
real... RMA reform. Uh, and you'll see in the resource management
replacement regime some, some further changes.
I think everyone kind of acknowledges the status quo is, is not-
Yeah.
... great. Um, just slight caveat
that, uh, you're often dealing with private property,
um, and
everyone's got a bright idea. Often it doesn't involve land that they own.
So, you know, you got to, um... You know, infrastructure is really important but
you, you are dealing with private property and obviously there are Public Works Act
implications down the line at various points. So, uh, we, we're...
You know, designations and corridor protection is, is important.
Um, but you got to have some clear tram lines, um, about the way at which we'll
operate. But we are going to make some changes there.
In fact, we've already done some changes.
And look, if I can ask one other which will also get asked later on probably of
NZTA, which is far rates for, um-
Yeah.
And it's just obviously now the pressure is gonna go on councils in terms of the
amount of, uh, rates, uh, caps, and so on.
Uh, but far, far rates, particularly for the smaller re- um, uh, rural
councils are gonna be really, really important because obviously if you change
those, all of a sudden their-
Yes.
... their rates base is affected significantly.
So just wondered how those two are gonna play out.
Yes, that's, that is true, but what I would say is that councils
should spend the money allocated to them already.
So, we have a significant underspend at the moment across
the three-year National Land Transport Programme period on local road
improvements. So this is money that has been allocated through the National
Land Transport Plan to councils to spend, co-funded
by central government, NZTA, with local councils.
And a number of projects have been deferred, delayed,
canceled, pushed back, re-scoped, in any number of different
scenarios, such that there is money available,
contractors ready and willing to do the work, and people willing to get
out there and do it. And for a variety of reasons that I find frankly
unacceptable, um, councils are not getting on with it.
So, um-
We'll follow that.
... sometimes pe- you know, sometimes people say...
I mean, e- everyone's under funding pressure, sure, but when there's money there
and there are projects that are listed in the National Land Transport Plan as
probable, as in, in the three years we're going to do them,
to councils, get on with it.
We will follow that one up this afternoon.
Sure.
Thank you very much both of you. Really appreciate it.
David.
Okay.
Will we ********?
Yeah, we will.
Yup.
We got the ****** stuff.
Okay, colleagues, we will, um, we're gonna...
Yes.
Colleagues, we're scheduled to take a, a short break.
Oh, great.
Um, so before we, um, have, uh, Maritime New Zealand in- Right.
What time
is it? Uh, 10:30. That's what I've got.
No, 9:00. I've got it here.
Oh, okay.
Oh, hang on. Sorry, I'm gonna look at the wrong one.
No, we're not scheduled to have a short break.
Sorry, I looked at the wrong-
(laughs) I looked at the wrong place. I saw Ruth looking at me-
I thought you were
reading? ... a bit, bit, ha, bit bemused. No. Sorry, we're not scheduled for
a break. Yeah. That's all right. Oh, I was like, "What day is it?"
(laughs) I'm getting ahead of myself down the, uh, down the page.
Step three.
It's Minister of Transport, and then Ministry of Transport.
So no, we're not scheduled to take a short break. We'll carry, uh, we'll carry on.
Okay. And we're still live? Good?
Yeah, it was so, a great piece of cheering there.
I think someone should perhaps just step down, is that...
Yeah.
Okay. You need, you need some other support team there, Ruth?
No. Yeah, we, we can kick off. That's fine.
Right. Okay, um, look,
thank you very much. Uh, and thanks for your support during the previous session as
well. Um, so look, we're in your hands for...
We've got you, uh, here for, uh, just to make sure I get this off right, that's an
hour. Uh, and, um, you know, so if you want to take five
or six minutes to start with, up to. And then we'll get into questions.
Thanks, Mr. Chair, and, um, thank you to the committee.
Um, for those of you who don't know me, I'm Ruth Fairhall.
I'm the acting CE at the moment. And I have with me, um, my
SLT, uh, uh, Paula O'Connell, who's the deputy chief executive
secretary, and hopefully soon David, um,
and also our, um, our CFO. So I just wanted to start by,
um, saying obviously this has been a big, a, a full year for the ministry.
Lots of, um, reform on. And I just wanted to acknowledge the work of the committee.
We've had a, um, with, with us, working with us on both the Regulatory Systems
Transport Amendment Bill, the Auckland Transport Governance Reforms, and Timed-Fee
Charging. So we've really appreciated, appreciated that.Um,
guided by our new strategic intentions document, we've focused on three core
priorities, supporting economic growth and productivity, improving road
safety, and strengthening our monitoring and assurance function.
And I'll speak very briefly about them, um, especially as we've sort of covered a
couple of them in the, in the previous session with ministers.
A modern funding system is essential to delivering the transport infrastructure our
country needs, and that's why we place such a high priority on this
work. We have advanced policy changes to support the implementation of a
modernized road user charges system to enable both broader tolling of
roads, time of use charging to help manage congestion on our busiest roads.
We've also did some market engagement with international and national toll road
investors and operators to explore new financing approaches for
infrastructure.
In aviation, we've completed the implementation of new Aviation, Civil Aviation
Action Plan earlier this year, and we have also helped launch an aviation
action plan
(inaudible) net. The plan was developed in partnership with industry and has
25 targeted actions aimed at growing and future-proofing the
sector. The plan addresses long-standing issues with the sector
such as regulations, workforce, infrastructure, and innovation.
And we're going to continue to work with the Aviation Council and industry
stakeholders to monitor progress on the plan and deliver the actions.
Turning to road safety, um, keeping people safe on our roads will always be a
priority. The new road safety objectives were completed in
October last year, and we're bring out, we're releasing quarterly updates on the
implementation of the plan to tackle our most challenging road safety
issues. And the minister spoke about the, um, the roadside drug testing that we,
that's coming up shortly. Um, we've also provided advice on
updating the graduated driver licensing system to make licenses more a-
affordable and accessible. And we're also underway in doing a review of road safety
penalties. Finally, as the lead agency for transport,
one of our core responsibilities is to oversee the performance and governance of
our transport Crown entities. Over the past year, we've sharpened our approach to
our monitoring, we've improved how we monitor report and drive accountability
across the sector. We have refined our p- performance reporting to focus on
what matters most, delivering better outcomes, greater efficiency, and
value for money. This includes publishing our quarterly transport network
performance reports and also our monthly a- aviation on time performance
reports for domestic and trans-Tasman routes.
And these reports help give clear insights into how the system is
performing. So these achievements reflect our commitments
to delivering a transport system that connects New Zealanders, supports economic
prosperity, enhances safety, and ensures value for public
investment. And I acknowledge the dedication of our staff and partners across
government, industry, and communities in, in working towards that.
The work we do each day makes a difference to the lives of all New Zealanders, and
I'm proud of what we've achieved. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Do you have any questions?
Right. We'll go to questions. I won't usually look there.
(laughs) Tane's get you quick off the mark, so okay, first up.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Okay. One, two, three on that side.
Thanks, Ruth and, and to the team. Um, these questions for me are around
RUC and the RFI that, um, has recently been announced by the
minister, the ministry are at, um, in that
space.
How is the ministry looking to address as part of a
RFI sort of process issues around lack of digital
connectivity, um, affordability issues for
the transition of the light fleet, uh, for vehicles
where, well, households that have vehicles that might not have,
um, technology that other vehicles, more modern vehicles
have? Um, so that's the first thing is that sort of lack of, uh,
reliable digital connectivity or the type of vehicle.
So where does that fit in the RFI process?
Yeah. So, uh, what we're doing from that process is trying to get as
much information from, uh, providers out in the market about what
options they have. So we expect we'll get, uh, responses
from
connected ve- vehicle companies that can do it for everyone.
Um, but there are other, uh, companies that we're hoping will come up with lower
cost solutions that don't require those sorts of connected vehicle
systems. Uh, the ability to simply take a photo of a, of an
odometer using an app. Um, and then we also want to understand
through the course of both, uh, that process and the future policy
processes, well, how much of New Zealand will that cover and
serve? And what other options do we need to have for
all New Zealanders? So we want people to be able to not just use an app,
we want people to be able to go to the supermarket to buy it if they want, um, or
the post shop or with their bank, whatever works best for them.
So we're hoping to get a whole range of different options over time.
Okay. There's not many post shops around 'cause-
(laughs)
... the government are shutting them down all around the place.
Um, but
one of the options labeled sort of manual alternatives.
Mm-hmm.
Is that what you're talking about?
Well, some of them could be man- m- manual alternatives, you know, the ability to
go somewhere face-to-face and buy your, buy your RUC if that's what you
want to do.
And, and that won't be sort of like a second tier sort of approach, you
know? Uh, I guess, I guess what I'm getting at here is that it's not going to be a
structural system where, you know, those that have vehicles that are
able to meet current needs around getting what they-
Mm-hmm.
... they need and others that don't, that there's kind of like a, a, a different
tier of, of operations?
No, there's, it's not expected to be a, you know, accredited system like that, no.
Right. Let's... Can I-
Oh, are you still going on RUC?
Just one more.
Okay, yeah. I just want to know if there are any subs on RUC, we'll do them in one
go.
Yes.
Okay. All right. Carry on.
Um,
the need for additional transport funding, how is the
ministry looking at ensuring that what is projected to
come from RUC in the future is going to align with
what the funding requirements are, um, for the
future as well? I know a lot of that is, is driven, uh, in
a different process through the GPS-
Yeah.
... but in terms of trying to get this transition
right, where is that thinking in the mix?
So, as a, as a whole, in giving our advice on, um, on GPS
and, um, with... and, um, I guess, what, what we need to talk about in terms of the
pipeline is very much trying to manage, um, balanced
investment and revenue options at a, at a high level.
So, um, RUC, um, increases to RUC and fee is part of that.
Um, uh, tolling is another part. Um, potentially more crowdfunding is another
part. Um, and we're very mindful as we're doing the revenue work and the re- the
RUC transition work, that
there will be calls in the future for, um, for changes to, to help
that balance. So, as we're thinking, I mean, that's one of the reasons with, um, as
we're trying to get RUC is working as well as possible at the moment, um, before
the transition.
So, we're thinking more of the RUC transition is about how people pay
for their road use, whereas you're sort of asking a question about w-
w- how much should they pay?
Uh, which we're trying to keep it, uh, a little, they're related but separate.
Sure. I, I guess the other, the other issue in that though is, um, the
transition, transmission, sorry, the transition of vehicles to
RUC.
Mm-hmm.
Are you doing work to ensure that that, that transition doesn't further
destabilize revenue options for the future?
Yes.
Yes. Okay. Yeah.
Dan?
Just a couple quick, uh, sups around, uh, RUC as it pertains
to, uh, electric vehicles. I read a report the other day saying that
one in five, um, EVs are
not renewing their RUC. So, I just, I'm wondering in terms of
compliance how, um, the ministry's, um, going
on. Uh, what can you tell us about renewal
of RUCs, um,
and how that's going for EVs and hybrids and so forth?
Uh, so I don't have the numbers, uh, with me.
Uh, the, the Director of Land Transport who you're talking to at NZTA later this
afternoon will have the n- the numbers-
Yeah.
... um, in detail on that. Uh, but, uh, compliance is something that we will
be thinking about during the transition, uh, and how we, with any
system, uh, RUC's obviously
more difficult to comply with than just
buying gas at the tank. So, that's something that, that, that we're gonna have to
think about, um.
And so, we had this 1st of April thing come in.
So, was it this year or last year where you, you had to do your
Right.
You couldn't... Do you know how much, um, how many-
My reaction is-
... 100% compliance or?
Um, it was, I think in the 90s. Um-
90s.
Again, NZTA can give you the, the, the data on that, but it was, um, higher
compliance than we had anticipated.
Um, and whether that's tracked through time is something that's worth exploring
with the agency.
And currently, you've got to, um-
Yeah.
... put it on your dashboard.
Yes.
Um, are there any enforcement or is it this kind of more of a,
um, good- goodwill, um... you know, uh, has there
been any enforcement of, you know-
A- a- again, that's something with, um, exploring with the agency about the
specific-
Yeah.
... aspects around, um, enforcement.
Um, the, the, the one, uh, encouraging, uh, bit of news is that in terms of general
fed and RUC revenues, that's ahead of budget at this point of time.
So, we're not seeing significant leakage in the RUC, um, revenue.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Certainly, we'd be expecting, um, it to be enforced.
Sorry-
Yeah.
Just two quick, uh, ones from me in terms of the, um, uh, the
RUCs. So just, the, uh, as you obviously, I mean, EVs,
hybrids, which is the question Dan's just asked, I mean, when, when it goes to the
whole fleet, compliance becomes really, really important, not only for the revenue
side, but also the integrity of the system.
So-
Mm-hmm.
... you're very much thinking about how, how that is done.
Yeah.
Um, so, so the second part of that is just, just thinking of all of the things
you've got to do, uh, I hesitate to ask, but I'll ask it anyway.
Um, have you got a rough idea of how long you think it will take to
get to the point of saying, okay, we, we think we've got a system that is, um,
operable, we think we can make it work. And I don't want to do...
The, the minister was quite clear, don't rush it.
But, you know, what's your thinking about the kind of timeframe?
Um-
It could take a year that it's likely to happen.
Yeah. So our current schedule is to have, uh, further policy
advice to ministers, uh, in mid-2026-
Yeah.
... to have, uh, legislation in place that will enable the market to
operate, uh, and provide different choices for New Zealanders, um,
by mid-2027. And at that point, uh, we'll give ministers further
advice on, uh, how
the timeframe for the transition.
Uh, the minister's been, uh, clear, uh, and we agree with him that it's
m- more important to get the settings right and working for people-
Yeah.
... before deciding on a date.
We don't want-
That, that, that gives a r- a rough, um, order-
Yeah.
... of the kind of timeframe we're talking about.
Okay, cool. Right. Okay. We're going to, um, questions in other areas.
So, I think we've dealt with RUC, so is it d- different, different area?
So, I'll go to Julie-Anne first there.
Okay, great.
And Tracy.
Um, I wanted to talk about, um,
emissions reduction, um, and what work
the ministry is doing to quantify, like,
future emissions from transport,
sp- including whether or not the ministry is looking
at, um, imp- climate impacts assessment of,
um, large proposals like the roads of national significance, just
the, the building of them.
In terms of the building of the roads?
Yeah.
Um, uh, no, not specifically. Um, we have, uh, we had a
big, um, focus last year as part of the emissions reduction plan number two, in
terms of, um, the modeling behind that.
Um, and, but in terms of the specific roads, in terms of the, um,
the RUC models, uh, I'm not aware there's any.
Would any... Is anyone doing that? Is NZTA?
Might be a question to ask NZTA this afternoon.
Maybe a question for-
How can you do the modeling for future, um,
ERPs without looking at the cost of projects that
are proposed in term of carbon cost?
So the, um, so with the, with the ERP2, uh, last year, we were
looking at, um, the impact of, well, obviously with ECS because it's the main, the
main transport tool and some other complementary policies that we had in place as
part of, were proposed as part and then put in place as part of
ERP2. So, I'm not sure. Are you aware of anything
with-That's ****** on-
If we're doing project that we'll monitor, if we're doing project that we'll
monitoring, no.
No.
So, but I mean like if projects are gonna be built in the next 10 years-
Yeah.
... and they're in transport
and it creates emissions to build them, you're
not putting that into the ERP?
Mr. Chair?
Uh, well, Cap- I'm not, not, not that we're aware of.
We can come back and check on that.
Okay.
Yeah.
Simon?
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just a little bit further on that, um, wouldn't it be fair to
say though that, um, all carbon emissions are actually
captured by the Emissions Trading Scheme, so they're paid
for and therefore between the designer and the contractor proposing the
solution, uh, they're taking that into account in
the offering? So, is there actually any more to
do?
It was, uh, but there may well, well not be because there, the others of
E- ETS is the main, as you're saying, the ETS is the main way the transport
emissions are, are captured. But we will-
Yeah. ... check for it and come back to the committee.
But, can I, can I just check that because like isn't the requirement to
model what's happening with emissions, which has, I, I think is slightly
different to what Mr. Court has asked 'cause, you know, he's
saying that emissions will reduce, but like isn't the point of counting
what's happening to see what's happening with emissions?
Yes. As I said, we'll come back to you to, to just clarify exactly what we did and
didn't look at in terms of the *******.
Okay.
Yeah.
I've got a primer from Dan, then a primer from Tangi, and then I'll take one.
Well, thank you. Um, just, uh, referring to kind of
outcomes of transport system,
um, on the finance committee we're doing this,
uh, inquiry into outcomes and performance reporting.
So I'm quite keen to understand kind of more intermediate
hard, fast outcomes. So let me take healthcare, right?
Like we've got these targets, you know, wait times ED, wait
times, um, very tangible things.
What, uh, uh, is, is your ministry looking at more tangible things
like kilometers of new roads, kilometers
of, uh, cycleways, you know,
paved, you know, more tangible stuff that connects to
the, um, economic prosperity, inclusive
access, all those things?
So as I, as I mentioned in my opening remarks, we do publish our, um, out- our
performance reports. So that, that does look at some of the me- (clears throat)
some measures across different modes.
Um, and there's, uh, I guess, uh, uh, uh as a
policy ministry, there's a, a distance between what we do and then what the actual
outcomes are. But we h- we have started reporting on that in the last year.
So y- you're, sorry, you're saying that that performance report does include
kind of more tangible-
Yeah, so the, uh, the, the
measures in the performance report are more, um, uh,
they're closer to outcome measures.
Uh, the, the, uh, so traffic flow, congestion-
Mm-hmm.
... those sorts of things. Uh, safety outcomes.
Uh, NZTA reports in more detail on its output
measures.
Mm-hmm.
So, you know, pavements rehabilitated, uh, the quality of the
pavement, all that sort of stuff, that's in their annual report.
Yeah.
We can, we can... Happy to provide the, the-
Oh, I'll, I'll have a
look at that. Yeah. ... report, performance report. It's on our website.
I guess 'cause you guys have a system level-
Yeah.
... perspective, so-
So, so we do, we do that across a number of different modes-
Yeah.
Uh, and some of it as well, yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Tangi?
Uh, thank you. Let's move to road safety.
Um,
since 2023, h- has there been a reduction in the ministry's
resource in the road safety
area, even if that's expressed by way of
FTEs?
In terms of the number of staff?
That's a good question. I wouldn't know in detail on the number of staff.
We've, we had a road safety team in 2023. We have a road safety team now.
I would have to get back to you on the exact number of FTE there was-
Okay. Thank-
... before or after.
That'll be helpful. At a broader level, there is a, a joint approach to road
safety. I know the minister ****** police, for example, that's
accepted. What, what
does, what sort of level around cross-agency
approaches
are being taken around road safety so that police are not
doing things in isolation-
Yeah.
... you know, and, and obviously you have s- different statutory roles.
I get that. But in terms of a connected approach around
road safety, what, what is actually that looking like?
So there, so there's a road safety executives group that convenes, um, every
quarter across, um, NZTA, police, it includes ACC now as
well, um, that, that meets, uh, and
discusses our progress against, uh, the road policing investment
plan, um, and the road safety objectives and, and what different,
uh, agencies are doing. Uh,
agrees actions. Yeah, so that, that, that happens quarterly.
So, so there is a shared view across agencies
around what is trying to be achieved in the road safety
space?
Yes.
How is that communicated to the public?
So objectives report is-
Yeah, so the road safety objectives, the, the government's priority for road
safety, those are, those are released by the,
uh, the minister. They're published on our website, um, and we report on, and we,
we report progress against them quarterly.
Right. I guess my question is there's, there's this work
cross-agency-
Mm-hmm.
... going on which, which I think is an attempt to try and ensure that everyone's
on a similar page with their-
That's right.
... responsibilities.
Yeah.
But how is that coordinated
sort of success
being communicated to the public?
Or, or are you saying that that's not happening, it's only police do their
sort of, you know, publicly available information around how we're meeting our
objectives and-
Oh, no, no, no. So the, so the road safety objectives report and progress against
it, um, is published quarterly on the ministry's website and that
includes actions for the whole sector.
Okay. When, when do you envisage that there will
be changes to, uh, show what it is that's
been achieved in the roads, in the road safety space
over time?
So, I think (clears throat) through our rep that, as, as Paul said, through the
quarterly reporting, it should be showing that.
Um, we can provide a copy of that to the committee, if that would be helpful.
But I mean, that's the, the idea of putting the reports out regularly, is to sh- is
to show that progress.
Okay. So, what, what would the Ministry's sort of view of success
in the road safety space look like?
A member of the public engaged with the Ministry and said, "What would success mean
from the Ministry's perspective around
making improvements in road safety?"
Well, as the Minister said, we'd like to see the road safety, the road, um, toll
come down and also not just deaths but also fatal injuries, so serious injuries
over time.
So, that's fundamentally the, the measure, is around fatality?
Well, I don't think you could re- re- reduce it to one measure 'cause we're also
wanting to make sure that, um, as public servants,
we're delivering on the outputs that
Parliament expects of us. So, things like rolling out,
um, uh, the, the drug testing regime, um, making
changes to policy settings. So, it's a both, right?
The outcomes and, and the things that will contribute to those outcomes.
Okay. And that's what we report on quarterly.
Okay.
Um, can I just ask you something on that?
Well, no, she's tak- taken a supplement problem or whatever.
No-
Yeah.
... just, uh, so who, who has accountability then if, if those
projects-
About
measurement. ... that aren't well... The operationalization of those
dependent variables aren't well-communicated, who ultimately has
accountability if that stagnates?
Well, I think it depends from, um...
It depends on the, the agency in particular.
So, police, for instance, are responsible for delivering against the road policing
investment program, uh, where the, the Ministry is responsible for
providing policy advice for ministers to make decisions.
NZTA is responsible for delivering its, uh, improvements
to infrastructure that will improve road safety.
Is there any move towards some sort of, um, uh,
cross-agency sort of measurement that, that captures what
seems to be from the outside, um,
some measures, not targets per se, but some measures that could be
quantified across those responsibilities?
Is there any work going on? I know you're using the Monti tool.
Um-
Yeah. Monti doesn't cover safety.
Doesn't cover safety in that area, but is there anything sort of similar in the
safety-
Well, we-
... space that could be-
Yeah. So, we're, we're, we're reporting on it regularly.
It's, it's, it's all up on our website.
Yeah. I, I hear what you're saying.
I'm just not entirely sure that that reporting actually shows what you think it
shows, is probably the frustration that I'm expressing.
Okay.
And I'm just interested, is the Ministry doing any work on
improving that reporting, therefore
that, that analysis that goes behind it.
But it-
Yeah. Uh, so we're always looking to im- im- improve the report.
If there are specific things that you'd like to see that you're not currently
seeing, please let us know and we'll, um, and we'll incorporate that into it.
Okay.
Okay. Still on safety?
Yeah. I had a series of questions about road safety.
And I wanted to know if the Ministry was doing any monitoring on
the impact of the new speed rule on deaths and serious
injuries.
Uh, not just yet. Um, as you
appreciate, it was 1 July 2025, it went across very
difficult to make conclusions at this early stage.
Um, but that'll be something that we'll be looking at to, look into in the future.
So, so you would be reviewing the impact of changes to the speed rule in terms of
deaths and serious injuries at some point?
Um, I would expect that like
most things, we're always looking at the performance of policy settings over time,
but it'll be several years, I expect, before you-
Several years away?
... would have thought so, yeah.
Um-
2026, before the school changes come in.
Yeah.
Um, have you... Like, is the Ministry involved or is it mainly
NZTA in kind of liaising with the, um,
local authorities on implementing that?
NZTA is responsible for liaising with local authorities on compliance with the
speed rule, yeah.
And do you get any... You have no role there whatsoever?
Well, we want to know that NZTA is doing their job.
Yeah.
Yeah. But if you want to know how individual RCAs are going-
Mm-hmm.
... talk to his-, talk to the director himself.
Um, is the Ministry doing any other, like, do they
have any other updates on what's going on with deaths and
serious injuries? Or is that primarily NZTA who reports on
that?
Well, we, we, we report on
that- You report on it.
... as does, um, as does NZTA. Um, this year, we're
at, I think, and I'm going off the top of
257.
Yeah.
Um, it was 290 last year, uh, 340.
Um, was it, sorry, was it 340 last year and 290 the year before?
Um, so very,
very early days but we're hopeful that it'll
not, not increase much but we've got quite a bit of period to come, as you know.
Okay. I've got, uh, three questions on safety and then I'll go to Tangi also on,
on safety. Um, just the first one on this, uh, in the, in the, um, safety
area. Vehicle, um, import standards from a safety point of
view, what's, what's happening there in terms of the trends,
any initiatives, um, how are we, how are we improving
that?
Uh, we are at the moment, uh, consulting on a rule on that.
So, consultation on, uh, safety vehicles,
safety features and vehicle imports.
We started public consultation on that rule in October 2025.
Uh, we're awaiting feedback and we're
expecting, uh, a, a, a rule to be signed in
2026.
So, that, that's obviously an aim, I'm presuming, to improve, uh, the
s- the quality of vehicles which are imported from what they are currently.
Can you just describe what, what we are currently and then what your, what
your aspiration is?
Yeah. So, the, uh, the
rule change that we're consulting on is around things like lane keep
assist and, um-... um,
uh, autonomous vehicle, uh, driving aids.
So, safety assistance and what vehicles they should apply to,
and whether they should apply to secondhand vehicles as well.
Okay. Okay, so it's not about, it's not about, um, impact levels,
things like that? You're, you're comfortable with that as they are at the moment?
I think so.
Okay, right. Cool. Um, second area of change, um, driver licensing changes.
So obviously there's been a lot of conversation about this.
Mm-hmm.
What is required to actually deliver those?
Is that a rule change or is it a, a legislative change? What is it?
Uh, it's a rule.
It's a rule change. Okay, that's cool.
Or, or-
Uh, ............................
Just,
I'll, I'll confirm whether there is actually any legislative elements to it as
well, but I, I think it's just a rule change, yeah.
I'm seeing nodding, so...
Yeah.
Okay. Look, if you can confirm that, that'd be helpful.
Um, and look, the third one is just, I, I'm, I might've missed it, if I did miss
it, if, if you'd said it. In terms of the Road Safety Committee, there's a National
Road Safety Committee, et cetera, and the way in which liaison is done.
Mm-hmm.
Is local government involved in that still?
Not on, not on the Road Safety Executives Group, no.
I'm sorry, not on the...
N- not in that particular group, no.
Okay. Where, where is, where is local government involved in the road
safety, um, decision-making?
Um...
Well, as road controlling authorities they've got an important implementation-
I, I'm aware of that, but, uh,
There was the, the National Road Safety Committee did include LGNZ at one stage.
Is that still the case?
No.
That hasn't been the case since I've been involved.
Okay. My ob- obvious question then is why not? 'Cause it has been the case.
Um, in fact there was a lot of advocacy to get it there, 'cause I was part of that
advocacy.
Yeah.
Why is loc- why is local government, which runs something like 90% of the roads by
length in the country not still involved?
I'll have to get back- yeah, I'll, I'll have to get back to you on why that
changed.
Okay. Whether it's LGNZ or some other work, thing, like, you know, the, the Traffic
Institute or, you know... I'm not...
I know lo- local government-
Yeah.
... New Zealand doesn't represent all couns- councils anymore, but some local
government involvement, that I would've thought would be useful.
Yeah. Either one.
Yeah, cool. We'll look forward to further advice on that. Tanya?
Yeah, thank you. Um, Ruth, you yourself indicated, you know, that the
committee's been working alongside, um, the Ministry around some
changes, and one was the introduction of, um, drug, uh,
testing or drunk driver testing. Um, the police have the
enforcement role, but the, the policy s- sort of side of things did
rest with the Ministry. What, what
expectations are there from you and your team around
what that will look like? Trend
opportunities, those sorts of things.
Obviously it's about to
hit the roads.
In terms of, um, how... What, what, what we expect to happen in terms of actual
delivery of it?
Correct, yes.
Oh, so, we're focused on successful delivery first and foremost.
So they actually, uh,
get it done, um, starting... So they're starting with the pilot
in, uh, December, uh, and then whether... How when...
How that's funded and what part of
the Road Policing Investment Programme that becomes over time, and
whether it becomes a, uh... Whether there
are delivery dependent funding associated with it like there is for other parts of
road safety funding is something we'll be considering in the context of the
2027 to 2030 Road Policing Investment
Programme. So we're currently in the '24 to '27 period.
Um, NZTA is responsible for up- overseeing that and enforcing
it up with the police. Uh, as
that,
as we get more evidence about basically how many tests they're able to
do, what sort of effects they're having, we'll be thinking about how
is that incorporated into, uh, how
we, how we oversee the police delivery from '27
onwards.
Do you think that's too long a timeframe?
If, if the pilot is being rolled out this month with the possibility of
it being rolled out to other regions-
Yeah.
... as I understand in the first quarter of next year.
Yeah, so-
And you're waiting until 2027
to look at any-
... potential?
Well, I think we'll, uh, we'll assess it in the context of the Road Safety
Executives Group that I, that I mentioned.
If there are opportunities to make a variation to the existing Road
Policing Investment Programme, which would require ministerial agreement to it, uh,
we'll be putting up advice on that in due course with, with NZTA.
I think, um, it, it doesn't mean we're waiting till 2027 to, to see what's going
on. It's just that the next 2027 to '30 plan or programme
is the chance to change it. But we'll be c- certainly keeping it eye on it next
year.
What, what have you identified as particular challenges
that might eventuate from a policy perspective, uh,
since the legislation was, was
passed?
From a policy perspective it's hard to say. I can...
There are obvious operational challenges that are going to be
difficult. The... Well, the... That, that, that will
be, uh, interesting to see how they play out
in New Zealand compared to other jurisdictions.
But, uh, the time it takes to conduct a test is obviously the, the big
factor here, which limits the number of vehicles that, uh, that the police are
able to stop. So that's how I-
Okay.
Yeah, that'll be a big consideration.
What, what mechanisms from the Ministry's perspective are in place
around, let, let's say as part of the pilot or initial
rollout early-
Mm-hmm.
... next year, there are real concerns about, for
example, time on the roadside.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
What levers does the Ministry have to
not wait an extended period of time to address some of, of those
issues?
When we spot, um, emerging policy issues, we can advise the
Minister at any point on, on changes that may be required to respond to
those. And we'll be doing that.
Have you provided any specific advice around those challenges to the
Minister post, um, royal assent?
I'm not sure in detail. I can get back to you on that.
Okay. I think that'd be helpful.
Mm-hmm.
Particularly if at that, um, leadership level cross-agency-
... you're saying that you're doing some work on that.
Yep.
I think it would be helpful to understand, well, as a result of that, what has-
Yeah. ... what has gone to the Minister or not. Thanks.
Mr. Chair, we had, we actually had a, um, a briefing, uh, a demonstration yesterday
that, that worked on the, on how it's going to work and the tests and how
they'll... Has, has the committee, would the committee find that useful?
'Cause I'm... The volunteer police actually come and show you what-
Ah.
... what actually happens?
That's a good question.
Well, well, I don't know. Are we aligning that with our own committee, uh, chairs'
experience over the testing regime?
Yeah, well, wasn't good.
(laughs)
It was the fa- it was a failure to del- to deliver anything.
(laughs) At least for a while. It did get there. It did get there.
I, I do think it would be helpful though- Yeah.
to get a bit of an understanding.
Yeah.
Because what we saw was kind of- Christine did, yeah, Christine did as well.
... not a prototype, but at the front end. Yeah. No, I, I, I think it would be helpful.
Yeah. Yes.
Yeah. It was, it was very interesting.
It just made it a lot more real to see what actually happens.
Yeah.
Because they've got the testing now, it's all theoretical otherwise.
Quite a bit further on from where they were when they were looking at the policy a
year- Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Jamie, for getting us into that trouble.
Oh.
(laughs)
Julianne.
Well, I'm really curious about
like how the substances that are going to be tested have been
chosen. Do you have any input into that or understanding?
Because it doesn't seem to be based on, um,
impairment at all. It seems to be based on legal status of the
substance. And in the case of cannabis, while it's
illegal, it's also legal, um, you know, if it's
prescription. So, but it's, it seems like they're only testing for
certain substances and not commonly prescribed, um,
prescription drugs that are likely to impair
at a far higher rate.
So, uh, police did run a process on that.
It was supported by scientists here and it was peer reviewed by, um,
I think Australian scientists. So we can get you more detail on exactly the process
they followed for that. Uh, and impairment was a, was a prime consideration,
I understand.
Mm-hmm.
Right. I want to go to different, different areas. Going back to funding.
So there's a thing that you have, the Land Transport Revenue
Plan. It's a... I'm not looking, I'm
not seeing any sort of, or not so, seeing any recognition of that.
You, you have a Land Transport Revenue Plan, I understand?
It's the Land Transport Revenue Act.
You do, right. Good. Excellent. Well, we'll ask about it then.
So, yeah. It broadly covers what we're doing on the RUC transition-
Right. Yeah.
... um, uh, tolling, uh, time of use charging which has been before the
committee.
So I wondered, could you give us a, um, a, a picture of...
We, we know that there's not enough money to do...
If, if you just said, well, all the projects, and I know the minister was quite
clear, this is, has been quite clear over a period of time, but all
the major capital projects are not all going to be delivered in your period.
Mm-hmm.
And I think that
pretty blindingly obvious for multiple reasons.
Yeah.
Um, but have you actually sort of projected what money is available,
likely to be available given the revenue streams, um, and what
money is going to be needed to maintain the, um, the network
as well as to do the capital projects?
Good question.
And what that looks like. Those kind of numbers over, say, the first, the first 10
years and then, you know, if you extrapolate that out-
Yeah.
... just with the projects we've currently got on- online.
Yeah. So as, so as part of, um, our work on GPS27,
we're, um, we've been, uh, doing, we have been doing some modeling
that, uh, and it's pretty high level in terms of what we might
expect from, uh, alternative revenue sources, um, other than
VET and RUC. Um, it's fair to say time of use charging is not designed
to collect, um, substantial revenue.
That's not the-
Yeah, I'm
standing here, yeah. ... purpose of that particular tool.
And tolling, um, the capacity to, um, to secure
substantial revenues is driven really by traffic flows.
And, um, in New Zealand, uh, most, most of the road
corridors are actually not, um, heavily traveled, um, with the exception of areas
like the, um, the Waikati, the Auckland Harbour Bridge.
Um, so again, um, we've, we've made some pretty conservative assumptions about how
much tolling revenue will, will contribute to, uh, to our overall
revenue base. There are other, um, tools like infrastructure financing,
um, the IFF, and that could be a more substantial,
um, uh, contributor, but that will come down to specific
projects.
So, um, I was really also interested in the, that's on the revenue side-
Yes.
... or part of the revenue side.
Yeah.
Um, I was also interested in what the, um, expenditure side looks like-
... and how that-
Yeah.
... how that gets framed over time.
In other words-
Yes.
... you said, well, we need this much to maintain the system.
And so we've only got this much, uh-
Yes,
exactly. ... but we've got a, we've got a big
pipeline of potential investment.
Yeah. That,
that's the question. What does it look like? So we get an-
Um- ... we get an overall picture. So it's also-
Yeah. And the minister's been pretty-
Sorry, I was gonna say, can I just finish?
Sorry.
It's also, I think, really important that, that the wider community understands
that we cannot, um, deliver everything
within that period of time. It's going to take longer to deliver.
Yeah. And I think the minister's been very candid about that in his speech.
Oh, yeah. He has to. Yeah.
Um, he, he, he's alluded to the fact that next year he, he's probably intending to
publish a pipeline, which will at least give a, give a, um,
uh, some signal to the public about, um, government intent there.
Um, it's not our job to actually advise on specific sequencing or staging
of individual projects, but that's something where the agency will be, um,
using its expertise on. Um, and we've got to, uh, consider not just
the roads projects, but also other, um, state highway improvements and, and other
demands on the National Land Transport Fund.
So I think what... It's not about-
Yeah.
I do... About saying, "Hey, do this one before this one," or anything like that.
No. No.
It's much more about saying, this is what the, the pipeline-
Yes.
... broadly looks like.
So you're saying that will happen sort of sometime next year-
Yeah.
... that that's going to be published-
That's
the intent. ... so we can see the...
Yeah. Yeah.
Um, okay, and just on the revenue side, the one bit which,
um, I kept on asking is about, uh, this is growth paying for
growth. Um, and we had the Infrastructure Commission in the other day saying we're
way short of growth paying for growth.
Yes.
Because growth is subsidized by people who are currently here.
Um, and, uh, so but I'm really interested in any work that's
being done by you, also by NZTA,
on, um, value up- value uplift capture, um, you
know, development levies, et cetera, when a development is
facilitated, enabled, made more likely by new infrastructure
development.
Um, we, um, uh, we ourselves have not led work on
development contributions. And so for that-
So that's NZTA, is it?
Yeah. Yeah. Um, but, um, as, as we consider particular
projects then their potential role in, in
supporting particular, uh, investments will always be a
consideration.
Yeah. Okay, so- Yeah. ... you're engaged with it, but you're not the lead? No.
Yeah. Okay, cool. Right. Um, other questions? Tony.
Oh, thank you.
Tracey, did you have... No? All right.
Um, the proposed merger between, um, MHUD, Ministry for the
Environment, and the Ministry of Transport, what
is the update in terms of where things are at with that?
So, um, those decisions aren't for us and we, we're, we're wa- waiting to find
whether there's, to hear whether there's going to be a decision.
Have, has the, uh, ministry been advised as
to when that decision is likely to be communicated to you and
your staff?
We just, we're waiting to hear when that's gonna happen.
That wasn't my question.
So, we're expecting a dec- well, we'd like to have a decision sooner (laughs) , uh,
sooner rather than later, but, um, we're not sure exactly when that will happen.
So, you, so you haven't been informed as to when that decision is likely,
um...
We're expecting it soon, but we're not exactly sure exactly, can't
guarantee exactly when it will be.
Okay. Again, that's not the question that I asked
you. The question was whether or not you had been informed as to
when a decision was going to be made.
So, we have, have an idea of when it's likely, but, um, those questions are best
directed towards PSC.
Okay. What implications for the operations of the
ministry, uh, exist in the interim whilst that
decision is yet to be made?
So, we continue to deliver our work program.
Um, at the moment I'm acting, we're gonna have a change in acting CE, um, in early
January, but we continue to deliver our work as we, as we, as we have
done all year.
What, um, what processes, uh,
exist within the organization, if any,
for staff to be able to feed
into, um, that decision-making process?
So those are questions for, um, the decision about a merger is not one for the
ministry. That's, um, a decision for ministers on the basis of advice from
PSC. And as I mentioned, those questions are best directed towards PSC.
Okay. I don't intend to be difficult around this.
So-
So I'll, I'll try and be very prescriptive around my question to you.
It's, it's not about the decision being taken by the,
the minister, the government, the PSC.
It's a question about what's happening currently in your organization,
and it's around are there processes or opportunities for your
staff or yourself to feed
into that decision-making process?
So I'm, I'm f- appreciate your question, but I'm just gonna re- rephe- repeat my
answer is that, that, those, that advice was given by PSC, um,
and you're best to ask PSC about the process for,
um, the minis- decisions about a merger.
Maybe appropriate to ask Minister Arch.
Yeah, I think that might've been, yeah, it might've been a question that may-
perhaps could have come up an hour ago or three-quarters of an hour ago, whatever
it was for the minister, so. But anyway. Um, right. Tracey.
Um, thank you. I've got a couple of kind of South Island-related questions that
I've cobbled together, so they might seem a little bit fragmented, and I'll
probably truncate just in, um, in lieu of lack of
time. But how much of that $1.1 billion
capital underspend relates to South Island projects, if
any? Um, and
therefore, um, what are the sort of implications for any
delivery timeframes or cost ex- escalations
or actually just regional equity if, if that
is...
Um, I think that's probably a question you may want to pose with the agency who
have the detail around that.
Mm-hmm. Okay. Um, we talked about, we briefly
mentioned the Monti tool, um, which I hadn't, um,
been overly familiar with, but I've been reading up on, um, in terms of that
long-term, you know, providing a long-term evidence base.
Um,
is it, are you quite satisfied that it's, that it's sufficiently calibrated
for, um, you know, for the South Island context?
'Cause I am aware of many examples over various sectors where we
can be a little bit overlooked, um, particularly relating to, you know, the
South Island population, visitor growth, hazards, scenarios,
et cetera. And the sort of the, I suppose the tourism
influxes in and out. Do you happen to talk about or give us
a little bit of information about how we account for that with that tool
that seems to be quite, that you rely on quite a lot for those future
projections?
Um, so currently the Monti tool doesn't take into
account tourism. Um, something we are working to
address. Um, it, in terms of both
islands, it is reasonably well calibrated against our
current, uh, tra- traffic monitoring system
and public transport, um, boarding and alighting.
So we're pretty confident we've got how people move around and in what
mode, uh, pretty well, um-
Sorry, can I just, can I just ask you to introduce yourself too, for the guy-
Sorry, I'm Dan Jenkins. I'm the director for Data Improvement.
Okay.
Exactly. And so there's still some scope within, um,
what you do now to, to sort of add the potential for other variables and
other, um, therefore being able to monitor other scenarios?
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Um, we consider Monti not to be finished.
Yeah. Um, and I don't think you'd ever really consider it to be finished as a tool.
So yeah, there's definitely more scope for adding additional
aspects. Um, regional air con- connectivity would be another priority for
us.
Anything down there, Tracey?
No, that's okay.
I, I want to ask a Monti question, so I'll sub off that one.
In the, um, uh, in the, the written questions, the
asked written questions, one of the bits you said in terms of Monti was, "We
haven't modeled any future population sizes outside of the stats median
projection or densities." Uh, I just wondered
why you haven't done that and whether you could, because that's really material
to, 'cause as I think I asked you when you were here,
the Infrastructure Commissioner said there are projections of a population
in 2070, I think it was, anything between under five million
and 12 million. Makes a material difference to, to what you need.
Um, stats were in front of the committee, uh, the other committee which I'm on,
Government's Administration, yesterday.And they were quite clear that these, what
they provide is the median projection. It is not a forecast.
That's right.
There's a bunch of assumptions sitting there. So, that's why I ask you.
I would have thought that's almost the most material lever and, or not lever, but
material variable in demand for all kinds of things, is
population. So that's why I wonder why we haven't actually
modeled that or s- thought about modeling, uh, varying different
population projections.
It's definitely som- it's definitely something we are considering.
Good.
Um, uh, in terms of the long-term insights briefing-
Yeah.
... material, um, we are obviously constrained by time and resource.
I understand, I understand that, yeah, yeah.
Um, and therefore that's why we've picked the median projection.
Yeah.
But-
Absolutely. I, I understand that.
It was more thinking about as you go forward, as you've got this
great new tool, uh, that you're actually able to look at it in terms of variable
population projections and, and of course locations of that, those populations.
Are they, are they all in Dan's electorate or are they all somewhere else?
So, so I'd encourage you to do that. Yeah.
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair. Um, in this financial year,
you've made some savings in your ministry and I see headcount
down, uh, to about 200 according
to, um, as of June this year. Just
wondering if you've got any planned, um,
areas for cost savings and if so, what are the kind of
areas that you're considering, um, to make sure that, you know,
we're getting the best value for money out of taxpayer money?
It's not specifically at the moment.
Um, we, we manage our budget very closely, um, and keep a, keep an eye on it
through our finance sub-committee, um, and regular reporting up to the, up to
SLT. Uh, policy, we're mainly a policy shop, so that sort of
can grow and shrink as required. Um,
????? which is, and we just do more or less work I guess.
And, but as I've said earlier, we, we continue to deliver our work program and we
just grow it when we have more people and do less when we have fewer people.
In the last few years, you've, you've, uh, really cut back your staff, but may
have been able to maintain a lot of the key functions.
Has there been any, you know, uh, pressures
or, um, is it just a natural productivity increase for-
Well, and we will continue to focus on the main, main things.
So as we, if we have fewer people, we, I guess we, um, be very focused on the
things that we really need to do.
Yeah.
So, um, and I've talked before about this with priority areas, with really making
sure we're resourcing such as revenue, um, and the revenue program in
particular.
Great.
What sort of things have you not been able to do?
Sorry, Tracey.
Uh, it's just, I mean, our work program always goes up and down, so it's not that
we've stopped anything, we just have, don't have, more things being added to
it.
Sorry. ?????? . Okay. Uh, thank you.
Tanya.
Thank you. Can I move to rail? Uh, more specifically the Metro Rail
operating model review-
Oh, you beat me to it.
Do you want to ask it?
No, I was gonna ask too, but you go.
Um, which has been sort of in the pipeline for a wee while.
Mm.
Um,
why, why is that review sort of process ta- taking a bit of time
and
what, what's sort of available to provide some reassurance that, you
know, there is some traction being actually made as opposed to it being
static?
Yeah. Um, that review we've, um, as part of that
process, we've, uh, we've got a senior officials group that,
uh, meets on a regular basis that includes representatives from Kiwi
Rail, um, the, uh, uh, Auckland Council AT
and, um, Greater Wellington Regional Council,
as, and NZTA as the key players in the system.
And
for this, this sort of change, um, the part of the, uh, work
is really about the interplay between these key actors and, um, and also
thinking about how the Crown can, uh, can actually
facilitate, uh, collaboration and, and the right sort of outcome.
So we've been seeking to test most of our ideas with that
group and, um, and ministers wanted to be sure that any
changes, say in the governance, um, a- arrangements, that they're actually
gonna have a beneficial impact. And so that's one
aspect in terms of, um, what we're doing is we're just really testing with that
group, um, some of our thinking there.
Um, and the, the other aspects of the work, of course, is, um,
ongoing, uh, funding for, uh, maintenance and renewals.
And that's something that we continue to, to work with those agencies about.
And there's, there's particular areas that we really want to dig into.
We really, uh, want to see productivity improvements in terms of maintenance
and, um, and that, that for us is, uh, really crucial.
Um, but also, um, exploring areas such as, um, priority access
into the Metro network. That's an area that we, we think is really important to
think through. Um, because, uh, at the moment these networks have got,
um, the metro operations, but also freight running through them.
So that's always a point of tension between the players.
So is all of this sort of an internal process
that's, that's, that's happening?
And if not,
how, how can that information be shared broadly out so the public have some
confidence that there is ??????
Well-
... action and progress being made?
Yeah. It's not internal in the sense that we've got external players who are party
to most of the information that's, um, that's been prepared.
But we are taking, um, advice to ministers, which we'd expect,
um, if that ends up in cabinet papers, they would be proactively
released as according to normal cabinet office guidance.
Okay. Thanks.
The question I was gonna ask-
Yeah.
... particularly around, um, there's obviously governance, governance changes
basically pretty well definite in Auckland in terms of AT.
Yes, that's right.
Um, moving into-
Yes.
... well, probably the transport CEO.
Yeah.
Uh, and then regional councils will almost, obviously, obviously it's a big, uh,
question mark about what happens with those as well-
Yes.
... in regional governance. So, which would obviously affect Wellington.
Um, have you given any thought to, or that collection given any
thought subsequent to those, um, changes being announced as
to the s- the structure and how it might best work and whether, you know, who might
be best placed to deliver those services going forward?
Um, okay, for all-
Or ????? passenger services. Yeah.
Yeah, look, um, for, for Auckland it's a bit more straightforward 'cause we've got
a unitary council to deal with and got governance reforms that the committee's
currently looking at, which, um, includes the Auckland, uh, Regional
Transport Committee. And we are giving some active thought about, um, how,
the rail aspects in terms of, um, at the governance level, whether
the ARTC should have some involvement 'cause we'll have the capacity to
produce, uh, uh, or do our standup sub-committees.In
Wellington, obviously, there's, um, local government reforms which, um, are under
consultation and, um, and subsequent government decision-making on that
will, will have an influence in our thinking about how we, um,
e- how we think about the governance of, uh, the Metro system here in Wellington.
But it's too early to say about that until actually definitive decisions are
taken on that.
Uh, I guess, I guess the question-
Yeah.
... is whether in fact it's, it's one thing to make decisions, decisions often
involve advice, so-
Yes.
... whether there might be advice flowing up from that committee to ministers,
"Look, here are some options how this could work.
Um, and, you know, this option has its pro- pros and cons, this one has these pros
and cons," and so on.
Yeah, yeah. We, our advice to date had been based on the status quo arrangements
around local government. Um, so we haven't yet as a sole met to actually
consider what the pot- potential changes-
But that group-
Yeah.
... um, will, could help, um-
Yeah, could help. That's right.
Absolutely.
Okay, that's excellent. Um, second thing in terms of, particularly in terms of
Auckland, uh, don't think it's so, might be a little bit Wellington as well,
um, is freight access. You, you mentioned tension there.
Yeah.
So one of the things which we're doing, as you're well aware, is the, uh, are look
into the ports and maritime sector-
Yes. ... which includes, um, access to and from ports and
maritime. Um, we heard from, um,
I think it was when we... Well, anyway, we, we've heard already that, um, there is
a challenge with access to, uh,
Auckland port. There's basic time constraint-
Right.
... uh, for rail.
Um, just wondered, uh, how does that come through this
Metro?
Well, that particular bottleneck, to what extent there is one-
Mm-hmm. ... it's not something that we are, we, we, we would be dealing with through the
MRON reform 'cause that's more at the high level governance arrangements, but-
So it's not, so it's not through this group?
No, we wouldn't actually-
Okay.
... be going through and sorting out any particular bottleneck.
We're thinking more about the governance arrangements which we'll check, we'll
check, we'll actually put all the acts together to actually sort through those sort
of issues.
Okay, that's cool. Anything else there? No? Okay. Right.
Any other questions that people have got? Julianne?
Uh, yeah, I just had some questions about any, um, advice the
ministry had prepared on the changes to discount
rate and evaluation period on projects.
Mm-hmm.
And then more broadly, um,
their view, if the ministry has a view on,
um, you know, sequencing of RONZ or whether that,
um, advice will be provided by a different agency.
So in terms of the discount rate, that's, that's Treasury's, um, uh,
gave advice about the
discount rate. Um-
Sure. Has the Ministry of Transport got a view on it?
I think at the time Treasury was, uh-
(clears throat) ... doing the preparatory work around that we would have, um, communicated with
them. I can't quite recall, um-
... exactly the advice we, that was communicated to Treasury on that.
That's, um, that was some time ago.
On, on the sequencing and staging of RONZ,
um, that's really not, uh, that's not really our specialty.
Um, that's really where NZTA's, um, best place.
They have the right expertise to actually think through those
issues.
(clears throat)
Has the ministry provided any advice on, um, value for money
and economic efficiency of the projects or, um,
scoping of the projects?
At, at the portfolio level we've, um, we, we have given advice to ￼
(clears throat)
And it, and really it's, um, something that's going to be worked through GPS27
where the RONZ program, other major capital programs, um, such
as in the public transport area and other demands on the National Land Transport
Fund, where we're going to have to navigate through the, um, the trade-offs and
priorities.
Okay. Um, I don't see any other questions so I'll just ask one more because we've
still got a little bit of time. Um, the, um, you've had
some, uh, audit work done on, in the area
around, um, some advice in the area around fraud
prevention, um, in terms of ￼ (inaudible) 00:23:55.000 I just wondered if,
um, you could just say how you've dealt with that.
I understand you have made progress on that but it would be good for us to
understand that, particularly given what has happened previously in the
ministry. Yeah.
Uh, Penelope Leith, I'm the CEO of the Ministry.
Sorry? Penelope Leith, I'm the-
Penel.
... CFO of the Ministry.
(clears throat)
Uh, yes, so we recently, um, had a new fraud prevention policy
approved and it has been rolled out and, um, if you, if you're
but we recently had, uh, Fraud Awareness Week across New Zealand so as part of
that-
Fraud Awareness Week across New Zealand.
Yeah.
Um, and so part of that we had some communications go up on our intranet to remind
staff about the new policy and provide them with the opportunity, some training
that the, uh, Leadership Development Center offers and, uh, we also had an
email go out from-
(clears throat)
... I think it was, um, our deputy chief executive of corporate services.
So you've got a new policy and this, the education is part of the implementation.
Is there anything else in terms of the implementation of that policy which you're
planning to do?
Uh, so we do ask that all staff do become familiar with
fraud. Um, I think the areas with-
(clears throat)
... issues with fraud at the moment, or perceived fraud, are actually external
to the vote. There's entities that we're monitoring so, you know, it was alluded to
about police earlier and there's been news around the NZTA.
It's also about how we, um, bring those issues up through our SLT so when
our staff kind of become aware of some issues in our wider transport system, that
we're, um, making sure our SLT are aware of them as well.
Cool. And so just to finish off that-
(clears throat)
... so the, um, that will be something which will be the policy says will be
repeated I presume?
Uh, so we review our policies regularly.
Oh no, sorry, I didn't mean reviewing the policy as much a- I mean as, you know,
it's, it's all good to train people and then 12 months later all, you know, they
kind of got that out of, out of... So does the policy basically say, "We will keep
doing it." I'm only asking you this because, you know, you've had an audit and
because of the history that's occurred.
And I know it was one person that, that was responsible for it but it's still an
important thing.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah, and I'd just add to it that, um, one of our, our core ministry values is
integrity and so we are-
(clears throat)
... ￡￠about those and in fact yesterday we, um, had our, um, twice a
yearly, um, integri- um, values awards and, and, um, had
acknowledgment of people who'd, um, particularly shown integrity over the last few
months. So that's something we're talking about regularly.
(clears throat) Thank you. I don't see any other questions
so, and we are at time.
(clears throat)
So really appreciate, um-
Yeah.
... all your feedback. There's a few, um, questions there I think that were, um,
where there was some further information to come back.
Uh, there will, there will be some further questions which we may well ask, uh, you
know, in writing. Um, but otherwise thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Um, probably-